---
title: Effect of ecoregions for Australian resident shorebirds in the context of seasonal migration using citizen science data
summary: Study 4
tags:
- PhD
---

Ecoregions are natural zones that feature separate collections of plants and animals because they have climatic homogeneity - the same temperature, amount of rainfall, and humidity. An ecoregion is the only unit that is small enough to be noticeable but large enough to be significant. An ecoregion encompasses a larger physical area than an ecosystem or habitat and it may contain hundreds of ecosystems and several habitats. Ecoregions are significant to conservationists because they contain places with critical ecological and evolutionary processes and circumstances. Although tropical rainforests and coral reefs harbour the most biodiversity, unique manifestations of nature can be found in all other ecoregions, which may be lost forever if they are not safeguarded and conserved. In this study we have analysed the effect of ecoregions for resident shorebirds in Australia in the context of local migration. In this study we considered count data for Masked Lapwing, Banded Stilt, Black-winged Stilt, Red-capped Dotterel, Red-kneed Dotterel and Red-necked Avocet, taken from Atlas of Living Australia (ALA) for the years 2000 to 2018 at a seasonal level across the whole of Australia. We have fitted spatio-temporal models with besagproper latent models in INLA, taking ecoregions of each bioregion, season and trend into account. 

The first set of models considers only main effects for trend, season and ecoregion, finding significant variation in counts across the seasons for all the species. However, significant differences in counts across the seven ecoregions were only found for the Black-winged Stilt, the Masked Lapwing and Red-Capped Dotterel. A significant upward trend in the counts for Masked Lapwing and Red-Capped Dotterel was also identified. The second set of models consider seasonal migration across ecoregions while controlling for trend, finding significant seasonal migration for all the species. The final set of models considered changes in the ecoregion distribution across the years while controlling for seasonal migration. This model suggested a decreasing trend for Banded-Stilt with no significant differences in this trend across the ecoregions. For all the other regions there were significant differences in trend across the ecoregions.

Possible biases in the citizen science data used in this study is one limitation of this study. In addition, our models are intended to describe only long-term trends in seasonal migration, and they do not allow for the sporadic flooding of wetlands in particular years. It is expected that wetland bird counts are under-estimated in these years because it is hard to reach these areas due to flooded roads. Also, the length of the series used in this analysis is too short to allow for El Nino cycles. Future models should attempt to take this into consideration while also investigating the reasons for increasing counts in some ecoregions and decreasing counts in other ecoregions.

As a follow-up to this study, examined the effects of ecoregions on biodiversity over time (with the same six inland resident shorebirds) using spatiotemporal models.
