---
title: Modelling the recovery of local shorebirds using citizen science data following a fox eradication program 
summary: Study 3
tags:
- PhD
---

In the past fox predation was the greatest land-based threat for shorebird colonies on Phillip Island, Victoria, Australia. Regular fox control for 20 years reduced the fox population, but shorebirds and seabirds including the Little Penguin continued to be decimated. Therefore, a fox eradication program was started in 2006, with three phases called knock-down, clean-up and post-eradication. An effective knock-down was declared in 2011, heralding the start of the clean-up phase. 

The impact of fox eradication on resident shorebirds has never been thoroughly assessed in this context. This study aims to track the recovery of six resident shorebird species found on Phillip Island including the locally threatened Hooded Plover and Sooty Oystercatcher. The methods used break new ground for assessing the recovery of bird species populations during a successful pest eradication program. We have used citizen science data for 2003 to 2017, extracted from the Atlas of Living Australia. The first analysis method used is INLA modelling assuming a Negative Binomial distribution for bird counts, in order to test for upward trends in shorebird numbers during the fox eradication program. The second method involves changepoint analyses to test whether the successive phases of the eradication process relate to changes in bird count levels. 

Five of the six shorebird species considered exhibited a significant positive response to reduced fox numbers over this period and all changepoint methods consistently identified the start of the clean-up phase with less consistency in the case of the start of the knock-down phase. The INLA models suggest a significant increase in the upward trend for the number of shorebirds since 2006 for three of the species considered. The fox eradication program was shown to be beneficial for all the species except the Black-winged Stilt. Agreement in the changepoints identified by the four changepoint methods suggests that for all these shorebird species, changes in bird numbers were linked to the timing of the clean-up phase of the eradication program. These methods show some promise for monitoring the recovery of native species during conservation programs; however, the use of citizen science data is a serious limitation of this study. 
