---
title: Effect of climate on species counts of the locally threatened Hooded Plover on the Mornington Peninsula using citizen science data
summary: Study 1
tags:
- PhD
---

The Hooded Plover is a resident shorebird in Australia which is listed as a vulnerable bird species under the IUCN red list assessment criteria EPBC Act 1999. In this study our aim is to identify the effect of climate for Hooded Plover on Mornington Peninsula on a spatial and temporal scale. In order to clarify the effect of climate on the persistence of the Hooded Plover we have used validated citizen science data available in eBird Australia. To quantify any effects of climate, we have considered average temperature and rainfall for each season from 2010 to 2019. Citizen science count data often includes excess zeros for rare species like the Hooded Plover in specific areas or time periods. Therefore, we have considered the most common zero inflation models using Negative Binomial distributions and allowing for a spatio-temporal data structure. The performance of the Negative Binomial Hurdle model was found to be superior for all the models considered. The changes in seasonal patterns over the years is not having a significant relationship with count numbers. However, this is not true for changes in temperature and rainfall patterns. The results show that the higher counts for Hooded Plover observed in unseasonably hot and wetter periods are falling in recent years. This study shows that statistical models can be used to address the challenges associated with monitoring the persistence of rare birds, while identifying factors affecting this persistence such as climate. However, the accuracy of the citizen science data used is a limitation for this study. 
